CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Matorral

We welcome contributions! This guide will help you get up and running.

If you have questions, reach out on [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/orgs/matorral-project/discussions) — we're happy to help.

Found a bug? Please [open an issue](https://github.com/matorral-project/matorral/issues).

---

## Getting Started

### Requirements

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and Docker Compose
- [just](https://github.com/casey/just) command runner
- [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) (see below)

### Fork and clone

1. Fork the repository on GitHub.
2. Clone your fork locally:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:your-username/matorral.git
cd matorral
```

### First-time setup

Copy the example env file and review the values (at minimum, set `SECRET_KEY`):

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Then run the init command, which builds containers, runs migrations, and seeds the database:

```bash
just init
```

### Start the app

```bash
just start              # start all containers with logs
just start-detached     # start in background
just logs               # tail logs
```

Open [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000). Create an admin account:

```bash
just createsuperuser
```

To stop:

```bash
just stop
```

> **Note:** Any change to `pyproject.toml` requires `just requirements` to rebuild the containers.

---

## Running Tests

Tests run inside Docker via `just`. Use dotted module paths, not file paths:

```bash
# Run all tests
just test

# Run tests for a specific app
just test apps.issues

# Run a specific test module
just test apps.issues.tests.test_views

# Run a specific test class or method
just test apps/issues/tests/test_models.py::TestIssueModel::test_method

# Run tests with coverage and print report
just cov

# Run tests with coverage only (no report)
just test-cov

# Print coverage report from a previous run
just cov-report
```

You can also run tests locally without Docker using `uv`:

```bash
uv run pytest apps/ -v --tb=short
uv run pytest apps/issues/ -v
```

> **Note:** Running locally requires a reachable PostgreSQL instance. The Docker setup is recommended.

---

## Setting Up pre-commit

We use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) to run linters and code checks before every commit. **Please set this up before making any changes** — it's what CI will check too.

Install pre-commit (if you don't have it):

```bash
pip install pre-commit
# or via brew:
brew install pre-commit
```

Then install the hooks in your local repo:

```bash
pre-commit install
```

From now on, the following checks will run automatically on `git commit`:

- **ruff** — linter and formatter (line length: 120, double quotes)
- **black** — code formatter
- **isort** — import sorter (black profile)
- **pyupgrade** — upgrades syntax to Python 3.14
- **codespell** — spell checker

You can also run all hooks manually at any time:

```bash
pre-commit run --all-files
```

---

## Making Changes

1. Create a branch for your work:

```bash
git checkout -b my-feature-or-fix
```

2. Make your changes and write tests. We aim for good test coverage — please include tests for any new behavior or bug fixes.

3. Ensure all tests pass:

```bash
just test
```

4. Ensure pre-commit checks pass:

```bash
pre-commit run --all-files
```

5. Push your branch to your fork and open a pull request against `main`.

We typically respond to pull requests within a few days. Pull requests are more likely to be accepted when they:

- Include tests covering the changes
- Follow the existing code style (enforced by pre-commit)
- Have a clear description of what the change does and why

---

## Notes for LLM-Assisted Development

If you are using an AI assistant (Claude, Copilot, Cursor, etc.) to help with contributions, point it at [CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md) and [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md). These files contain architecture notes, patterns, and conventions that help the model understand the codebase correctly.

---

## Tech Stack

Django · PostgreSQL · Redis · Celery · HTMX · Alpine.js · Tailwind CSS · DaisyUI · Vite

Commit message:

Add a new "A Note on Feature Contributions" section to CONTRIBUTING.md
Including:
- Explains Matorral's philosophy of intentional simplicity
- Politely but clearly asks contributors to open a discussion before building a feature
- Frames it as a benefit to the contributor (saves wasted effort)
- Explicitly carves out bugs/improvements as always welcome, so it doesn't feel too restrictive

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Matorral

We welcome contributions! This guide will help you get up and running.

If you have questions, reach out on [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/orgs/matorral-project/discussions) — we're happy to help.

Found a bug? Please [open an issue](https://github.com/matorral-project/matorral/issues).

---

## A Note on Feature Contributions

Matorral is intentionally designed to be a **simple, focused project management tool**. We care deeply about keeping it approachable and avoiding unnecessary complexity — every feature we add is a feature every user has to understand, and every option we introduce is one more thing that can go wrong.

Because of this, we ask that you **reach out before investing time in a new feature**. Please open a [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/matorral-project/discussions) or [issue](https://github.com/matorral-project/matorral/issues) to share your idea and get feedback from the maintainers first. This conversation helps us align on whether the feature fits the project's direction — and it saves you from putting effort into a pull request that we may not be able to accept.

We genuinely appreciate every contribution, and we want to make sure yours lands. Talking first is the best way to ensure that happens.

Bug fixes and improvements to existing behavior are always welcome and generally don't need prior discussion.

---

## Getting Started

### Requirements

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and Docker Compose
- [just](https://github.com/casey/just) command runner
- [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) (see below)

### Fork and clone

1. Fork the repository on GitHub.
2. Clone your fork locally:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:your-username/matorral.git
cd matorral
```

### First-time setup

Copy the example env file and review the values (at minimum, set `SECRET_KEY`):

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Then run the init command, which builds containers, runs migrations, and seeds the database:

```bash
just init
```

### Start the app

```bash
just start              # start all containers with logs
just start-detached     # start in background
just logs               # tail logs
```

Open [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000). Create an admin account:

```bash
just createsuperuser
```

To stop:

```bash
just stop
```

> **Note:** Any change to `pyproject.toml` requires `just requirements` to rebuild the containers.

---

## Running Tests

Tests run inside Docker via `just`. Use dotted module paths, not file paths:

```bash
# Run all tests
just test

# Run tests for a specific app
just test apps.issues

# Run a specific test module
just test apps.issues.tests.test_views

# Run a specific test class or method
just test apps/issues/tests/test_models.py::TestIssueModel::test_method

# Run tests with coverage and print report
just cov

# Run tests with coverage only (no report)
just test-cov

# Print coverage report from a previous run
just cov-report
```

You can also run tests locally without Docker using `uv`:

```bash
uv run pytest apps/ -v --tb=short
uv run pytest apps/issues/ -v
```

> **Note:** Running locally requires a reachable PostgreSQL instance. The Docker setup is recommended.

---

## Setting Up pre-commit

We use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) to run linters and code checks before every commit. **Please set this up before making any changes** — it's what CI will check too.

Install pre-commit (if you don't have it):

```bash
pip install pre-commit
# or via brew:
brew install pre-commit
```

Then install the hooks in your local repo:

```bash
pre-commit install
```

From now on, the following checks will run automatically on `git commit`:

- **ruff** — linter and formatter (line length: 120, double quotes)
- **black** — code formatter
- **isort** — import sorter (black profile)
- **pyupgrade** — upgrades syntax to Python 3.14
- **codespell** — spell checker

You can also run all hooks manually at any time:

```bash
pre-commit run --all-files
```

---

## Making Changes

1. Create a branch for your work:

```bash
git checkout -b my-feature-or-fix
```

2. Make your changes and write tests. We aim for good test coverage — please include tests for any new behavior or bug fixes.

3. Ensure all tests pass:

```bash
just test
```

4. Ensure pre-commit checks pass:

```bash
pre-commit run --all-files
```

5. Push your branch to your fork and open a pull request against `main`.

We typically respond to pull requests within a few days. Pull requests are more likely to be accepted when they:

- Include tests covering the changes
- Follow the existing code style (enforced by pre-commit)
- Have a clear description of what the change does and why

---

## Notes for LLM-Assisted Development

If you are using an AI assistant (Claude, Copilot, Cursor, etc.) to help with contributions, point it at [CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md) and [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md). These files contain architecture notes, patterns, and conventions that help the model understand the codebase correctly.

---

## Tech Stack

Django · PostgreSQL · Redis · Celery · HTMX · Alpine.js · Tailwind CSS · DaisyUI · Vite
